docs(api protection): add server side validation (#78)
logto-io/docs: docs/docs/recipes/protect-your-api/README.md

# ⚔️ Protect your API

> With a fluent user sign-in experience, by default, Logto comes with the [API resources](../../references/resources/README.md) authorization service. It will help you protect the your APIs resources from anonymous identities. Let's walk through the following steps and implement the API resource authorization guard of your own using Logto.

Author: good point more like a typo to me.

## Register the API resource through Logto **Admin Console**

> Logto will identify the registered [API resources](../../references/resources/README.md) from an authorization request and issue an audience-restricted `access_token` accordingly.

Reviewer: Maybe not accurate in Logto.
```
Logto will recognize the registered API resources when provided in an authorization request and issue an audience-restricted `access_token` when requested with the specific resource.
```

Author: ` when provided` feels redundant to me though.

Go to the **API Resources** section in **Admin Console**. You will notice a build-in resource listed with the API identifier as `https://api.logto.io.` This resource indicates all the management APIs you may use to maintain the Logto service. It will guarantee all our APIs are under protection and restricted to the Logto authorized users with Admin Role.

<!-- TODO: Replace the API resource AC screenshot -->

![](/img/docs/api_resource_landing.png)
<br />
<br />

> Next, click on the **Create API Resource** button to register your API resource by entering:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, click on the **Create API Resource** button and fill out the form to register your API resource:
```

Author: updated

All the API Resources record registered in Logto **Admin Console** will be shared across all your applications.
:::

> ## Register the API resources to your client application

Reviewer 2: It's not like a registration process. more like integration or "add the API resource to your auth request"

Author: updated

```

Now you have your application well equipped. All the requests from a sign-in user through your application will be well-authorized. Let's go back to your server-side and block out those anonymous attempts.

## Parse and Validate the API request's authorization

The most crucial step, protect your API resources with trustworthy token validation.

As mentioned above, all the authorized requests should carry an [JWT](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7519) format `assess_token` issued by Logto in its Authorization header.

### Get the JWK Public Key

All tokens issued by logto are signed with [JWK](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7517). (See [JWS](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7515) for more details)

> Before moving on, you will need a public key to verify the signature of the Bearer Token(`access_token`).

Reviewer 3: Better add spacing.

```suggestion
Before moving on, you will need a public key to verify the signature of the Bearer Token (`access_token`).
```

Author: updated

The key set can be inquired through Logto's **jwks_uri**: `https://<your-logto-domain>/oidc/jwks`.

:::note
All the latest Logto Authorization Server Configurations can be found by `https://<your-logto-domain>/oidc/.well-known/openid-configuration`, including the **jwks_uri** and other authorization configs.
:::

As a response, you will get a JWKS (JSON Web Key Sets). **Keep it** on your server. You will need it to verify all the requests' token signatures.

### Validate the existence and extract the Bearer Token from Headers

The request should contain an `Authorization` header with a `Bearer <access_token>` format. Extract the Bearer Token from the request header:

<Tabs>

<TabItem value="js" label="NodeJs">

```js
import { IncomingHttpHeaders } from 'http';

const extractBearerTokenFromHeaders = ({ authorization }: IncomingHttpHeaders) => {

>   assertThat(authorization, new Error({ code: 'auth.authorization_header_missing', status: 401 }));

Reviewer 4: replace `assertThat` with `if` statement?

Author: updated

- the token's issuer is `https://<your-logto-domain>/oidc` (issued by the Logto server)
- the token's audience is the current API indicator (audience-restricted)
- the token is with in its valid lifetime

There are various open-source libraries and middleware can help you validate the tokens easily. Most of them are implemented with just one method with various customizable configurations to verify and parse a JWT token.

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="js" label="Express">

Use [jose](https://github.com/panva/jose) to validate the token's signature, expiration status, and the required claims.

```js
import { jwtVerify } from 'jose';

const { payload } = await jwtVerify(
  token,  // The raw Bearer Token extracted from the request header
  publicKey, // jwks inquired from Logto server
  {
    issuer, // expected issuer of the token, should be https://<your-logto-domain>/oidc (issued by the Logto server)
    audience: // expected audience token, should be the resource indicator of the current API
  });
```

</TabItem>
  <TabItem value="java" label="Spring">
  // TODO:
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Reference

> Logto uses the code-based OAuth 2.0 Authorization Protocol to make your API request flow more secure. If you are interested in the strategy behind, please refer to OAuth 2.0's [official document](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-1.3.1) for more details.

Reviewer 3: Improved by Grammarly
```suggestion
Logto uses the code-based OAuth 2.0 Authorization Protocol to make your API request flow more secure. If you are interested in the strategy behind it, please refer to OAuth 2.0's [official document](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-1.3.1) for more details.
```

Author: updated

- the token's issuer is `https://<your-logto-domain>/oidc` (issued by the Logto server)
- the token's audience is the current API indicator (audience-restricted)
- the token is with in its valid lifetime

There are various open-source libraries and middleware can help you validate the tokens easily. Most of them are implemented with just one method with various customizable configurations to verify and parse a JWT token.

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="js" label="Express">

Use [jose](https://github.com/panva/jose) to validate the token's signature, expiration status, and the required claims.

```js
import { jwtVerify } from 'jose';

const { payload } = await jwtVerify(
  token,  // The raw Bearer Token extracted from the request header
  publicKey, // jwks inquired from Logto server
  {
    issuer, // expected issuer of the token, should be https://<your-logto-domain>/oidc (issued by the Logto server)
    audience: // expected audience token, should be the resource indicator of the current API
  });
```

</TabItem>
  <TabItem value="java" label="Spring">
  // TODO:
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Reference

> Logto uses the code-based OAuth 2.0 Authorization Protocol to make your API request flow more secure. If you are interested in the strategy behind it, please refer to OAuth 2.0's [official document](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-1.3.1) for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Logto uses the code-based OAuth 2.0 Authorization Protocol to make your API safer. If you are interested in the strategy behind it, refer to OAuth 2.0's [official document](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-1.3.1) for more details.
```

Author: updated

```

> Now you have your application well equipped. All the requests that come from a log-in user through your application will be well-authorized. Let's go back to your server-side, and block out those anonymous attempts.

Author: updated

## Validate the API request's authorization

The most important step, protect your API resources with the trustworthy token validation.

As mentioned above, all the authorized requests should carry an [JWT](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7519) format `assess_token` issued by Logto in its Authorization header.

### Get the JWK Public Key

> All tokens issued by logto are signed with [JWK](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7517). ( See [JWS](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7515) for details)

Author: updated

> You will need a public key to verify the signature of the Bearer Token(_access_token_) before moving on.

Author: updated

The key set can be inquired through Logto's **jwks_uri**: `https://<your-logto-domain>/oidc/jwks`.

:::note

> All the latest Logto Authorization Server Configurations can be found by `https://<your-logto-domain>/oidc/.well-known/openid-configuration`. Including the **jwks_uri** and other authorization configs.

Author: updated

:::

> As a response, you will get a JWKS ( JSON Web Key Sets). **Keep it** on your server. You will need it to verify all the requests' token signatures.

Author: updated

- JOSE Header: Declares the code type and encode algorithm
- JWS Payload: Includes all the token's claims
- JWS Signature: Signature signed with JWK

A standard schema of Logto JWS Payload: (claims may very, based on your OIDC config)

| key       | description                |
| --------- | -------------------------- |
| jti       | unique JWT ID              |
| sub       | subject, usually user id   |
| iat       | timestamp token issues at  |
| exp       | timestamp token expires at |
| client_id | application id             |
| iss       | token issuer identity      |
| aud       | audience of the token      |

:::note
For development, you could use a handy site, [jwt.io](https://jwt.io/), to decode and check the tokens you received. Be careful with the tokens come from production env, as the service is provided by a third party, and your token may be toasted.
:::

The Bearer Token should be accepted only if:

- the token's signature is verified
- the token's issuer is `https://<your-logto-domain>/oidc` (issued by the Logto server)
- the token's audience is the current API indicator (audience-restricted)

> - the token is with n its valid lifetime

Reviewer 2: is this a standard process? do we have link to reduce the content size?

Author: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7519#section-7.2 only provides a standard JWT format validation guide. Need to mention the payload validation here.

> There are various open source tools that can help you tovalid the tokens easily:

Reviewer 3: Improved by Grammarly
```suggestion
There are various open-source tools that can help you validate the tokens easily:
```

Author: updated

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="js" label="Express">

Use [jose](https://github.com/panva/jose) to validate the token's signature, expiration status, and the required claims easily.

```bash
  npm install jose --save

> ```

Reviewer 2: no need to mention installation here since the package itself has the manual

```js
import { jwtVerify } from 'jose';

const { payload } = await jwtVerify(
  token,  // The raw Bearer Token extracted from the request header
  publicKey, // jwks inquired from Logto server
  {
    issuer, // expected issuer of the token, should be https://<your-logto-domain>/oidc (issued by the Logto server)
    audience: // expected audience token, should be the resource indicator of the current API
  });
```

</TabItem>
  <TabItem value="java" label="Spring">
  // TODO:
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Reference

> Logto uses the Code Based OAuth 2.0 Authorization Protocol to make your API request flow more secure. If you are interested in the strategy behind , please refer to OAuth 2.0's [official document](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-1.3.1) for more details.

Reviewer 2: code-based?

Author: updated

> Logto uses the Code Based OAuth 2.0 Authorization Protocol to make your API request flow more secure. If you are interested in the strategy behind , please refer to OAuth 2.0's [official document](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-1.3.1) for more details.

Reviewer 3: Improved by Grammarly
```suggestion
Logto uses the code-based OAuth 2.0 Authorization Protocol to make your API request flow more secure. If you are interested in the strategy behind it, please refer to OAuth 2.0's [official document](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-1.3.1) for more details.
```

Author: updated
